Australia has some of the best beaches
in the world and everybody loves going
to the beach but there's something on
the beach called rip currents grips are
something that every Australian and
every overseas tourists should know
about because you're something that can
get you into trouble I'm dr. Rob Brander
from the University of New South Wales
and I'm a surf scientist surf lifesaving
during the summer months in Australia on
average somebody drowns in a rip every
two or three days and most of the
thousands of rescues that happen on our
beaches are related to rips remember
that it only takes about a minute to
drown so it's very important bit of spa
trips on your own if you haven't noticed
I've been swimming between the flags and
that's where everybody should swim
because the lifesavers and the
lifeguards put the flags and the safest
part of the beach away from the ribs if
you don't know what a rip is if you swim
clean the flags that takes a lot of the
guesswork out of having to spot one
however of the more than 11,000 beaches
in Australia only three percent are
actually patrolled by surf lifesavers
and lifeguards and that means there's a
lot of beaches and a lot of rips that
you could easily get into trouble in
well what are ribs it's a really good
question and when we do is we throw
purple dye which is harmless into the
water da goes wherever the water goes
and it's an easy way to spot the rip
well let me tell you what rips are not
they're not undertow they won't pull you
under because there's no such thing as
an undertow they're not rip tides
because they're not a tide their current
they flow pretty steady and they won't
take you to New Zealand basically rips
are strong narrow currents that flow
from the shoreline through the surf zone
and offshore they exist to take all the
breaking water that's piling up on the
beach back out to sea alright the best
way to spot a rip is look for dark gaps
right behind me we've got a nice grip it
looks like a dark gap almost like a road
or path going through the surf now over
here it's a shallow sandbar the waves
are breaking all that white water is
piling up on the beach starts flowing
along the beach in this deeper channel
and then turns the corner and that's
your rip and that's what you look for
dark gaps it's a pretty scary experience
getting stuck in a rip and there's
definitely some do's and don'ts about
how you should behave if you do find
yourself caught in one the main thing is
not to panic don't panic because the RIP
will not pull you under the water all
the RIP will do will take you further
out to sea and it will sometimes bring
you back remember that you've got air in
your lungs you float your very buoyant
so don't panic the second thing to do is
if you're not a particularly good
swimmer put your hand up straight up
like that signals for the lifeguards and
the lifesavers to come and get you what
you could also do if you're a good
swimmer is you could look around if you
can see the sides of the RIP which is
usually the shallower water where the
waves are breaking lot of white water
swim towards that area white water is
good because it means it's shallow you
can maybe stand up and also whitewater
brings you back to the beach what you
should never do is swim against the rib
these things feel pretty fast and you'll
just find yourselves going backwards
swimming fast or getting tired and then
you'll start to get scared so just go
with the flow signal for the lifeguard
but let the rib take you around and get
out of it yourself one of the reasons
that rips are dangerous is that they
flow faster than people can swim it
sometimes they can flow faster than even
Olympic swimmers rips are most dangerous
because they actually look like the
safest place to swim a view from a
headland is always a good way to spot a
rib because you're up high and you're
looking down to the beach and they're a
lot easier to see and often surfers and
swimmers will check out the beach for
ribs before they go down in the water
not all rips are the same the most
common type is what we call a fixed rip
and fix trips are stuck between San bars
and they might stay in the same place
for days weeks and even months another
type of rip is a flash room in flash
rips form when waves are really big a
really messy and all of a sudden the
water piles up and pushes out the back
of the surf well we've just had an
example of a flash rip where all of a
sudden trip is pulsed out where those
surfers are you can see the the chopped
up messy whitewater this is gone out and
then it's just stopped and that's when
one common thing about these flash rips
is that they can suddenly occur anywhere
where there's suddenly been a large
group of waves breaking and it pushes
the rip out and then it disappears
finally we get something called a
permanent rip or headland rip and these
are rips that are pushed against the
headland and they're they're almost all
the
on so it's another good reason to always
be careful when you're swimming close to
head lands and rocks if there's no
lifeguards or flags on the beach the
simple rule is don't go in if you do go
in make sure you're an experienced
swimmer a surfer make sure you're always
with somebody and make sure you know how
to spot ribs
you